Added editorial for mex vs med cf-1744f (#3872)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/silver/cf-1744F.mdx

---
id: cf-1744F
source: CF
title: MEX vs MED
author: Alex Du
---

> <Spoiler title="Hint 1">

Reviewer: Isn't this already defined in the problem

To find subsegments with a given value of $\texttt{mex}$, we must find subsegments which contain all
integers $0, 1, \ldots, \texttt{mex}-1$, while also not containing $\texttt{mex}$.

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Hint 2">

For a subsegment of length $\leq 2 \cdot \texttt{mex}$, the condition $\texttt{mex} > \texttt{med}$ will be satisfied, since the median can be at most $\texttt{mex}-1$.

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Solution">

## Explanation

[Official Analysis](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/108101)

We will iterate $\texttt{mex}$ from $1$ to $n-1$, finding all valid subsegments of that $\texttt{mex}$ at a time.

> Let $l$ and $r$ represent the highest left bound and the lowest right bound respectively of a subsegment that satisfies a given $\texttt{mex}$, and $\texttt{pos}$ represent  the index of $\texttt{mex}$. If we know $l$, $r$, and $\texttt{pos}$, then we can quickly count the subsegments for a given $\texttt{mex}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $l$ and $r$ represent the highest left bound and the lowest right bound, respectively, of a subsegment that satisfies a given $\texttt{mex}$, and $\texttt{pos}$ represent the index of $\texttt{mex}$. If we know $l$, $r$, and $\texttt{pos}$, we can quickly count the subsegments for a given $\texttt{mex}$.
```

> First, if $\texttt{pos}$ is between $l$ and $r$, the number of valid subsegments with this $\texttt{mex}$ is zero since the $\texttt{mex}$ of this subsegment is greater than the $\texttt{mex}$ we are looking for.

Reviewer: Isn't this obvious?

> We need to find all subsegments of length $\leq 2 \cdot \texttt{mex}$ that contain $l \ldots r$ and don't include $\texttt{pos}$. Say $\texttt{pos}>r$, since we only need to change our approach slightly if $\texttt{pos} < l$. We can increment $r$ from $r$ to $\texttt{pos}-1$ fast enough, since each time we increment we increase the size of our subsegment by $1$, for a maximum of $N$ times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to find all subsegments of length $\leq 2 \cdot \texttt{mex}$ that contains $l \ldots r$ and omit $\texttt{pos}$. Say $\texttt{pos}>r$, since we only need to change our approach slightly if $\texttt{pos} < l$. We can increment $r$ from $r$ to $\texttt{pos}-1$ fast enough since each time we increment, we increase the size of our subsegment by $1$, for a maximum of $N$ times.
```

Reviewer: ```
Say $\texttt{pos}>r$, since we only need to change our approach slightly if $\texttt{pos} < l$. We can increment $r$ from $r$ to $\texttt{pos}-1$ fast enough since each time we increment, we increase the size of our subsegment by $1$, for a maximum of $N$ times.
```

This sounds really wordy and doesn't really make grammatical sense "We can increment $r$ from $r$ to $\texttt{pos}-1$ fast enough" doesn't make sense, and you don't end a sentence with "since we only need to change our approach slightly if $\texttt{pos} < l$."

> Considering this new bound of $r$, we can find the number of possible values of $l$ that form a valid subsegment. We know that the $\texttt{mex}$ is correct for this subsegment, so we just need to find the number of positions $\leq l$ such that $r-l+1 \leq \texttt{mex} \cdot 2$. The lower

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Considering this new bound of $r$, we can find the number of possible values of $l$ that form a valid subsegment by finding the number of positions $\leq l$ such that $r-l+1 \leq \texttt{mex} \cdot 2$. The lower
```

Reviewer: Add "Note that if this value is negative, we should set it to $0$." to this paragraph and make it concise (not its own sentence) - put it in a separate sentence or something

bound of our smallest value of $l$ is $r-\texttt{mex} \cdot 2 + 1$, which we can find by rearranging the previous inequality.

> Note that if this value is negative, we should set it to $0$. After this, we know that all values between $l$ and this smallest $l$ are valid left bounds for our given $r$ so that we can add $l-\texttt{smallest\_l} + 1$. Again, note that if $l < \texttt{smallest\_l}$, which will happen in the case that our subsegment is too big for our current $\texttt{mex}$, we should instead add $0$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this, we know that all values between $l$ and the lower bound of $l$ are valid left bounds for our given $r$, so we can add $l-\texttt{smallest\_l} + 1$ to the answer.
```

Reviewer: Add the original third sentence (again, note that...we should instead add $0$) to the second sentence but make it concise and not its own sentence

> We can do the same if $\texttt{pos} < l$, by decrementing from $l$ to $\texttt{pos}+1$ with minimal changes to the math. To quickly find the next position of $\texttt{mex}$, we can store the position of each integer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If $\texttt{pos} < l$, we can decrement from $l$ to $\texttt{pos}+1$ with minimal changes to the math. To quickly find the next position of $\texttt{mex}$, we can store the position of each integer.
```

Reviewer: This doesn't make sense: "with minimal changes to the math"

Also, you should explain this further "To quickly find the next position of $\texttt{mex}$, we can store the position of each integer."

---
id: cf-1744F
source: CF
title: MEX vs MED
author: Alex Du
---

## Explanation

> [Official Analysis](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/108101)

Reviewer 2: move this under solution spoiler tag

<Spoiler title="Hint 1">

To find subsegments with a given value of $\texttt{mex}$, we must find subsegments which contain all
integers $0, 1, \ldots, \texttt{mex}-1$, while also not containing $\texttt{mex}$.

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Hint 2">

For a subsegment of length $\leq 2 \cdot \texttt{mex}$, the condition $\texttt{mex} > \texttt{med}$ will be satisfied, since the median can be at most $\texttt{mex}-1$.

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Solution">

We will iterate  $\texttt{mex}$ from $1$ to $n-1$, finding all valid subsegments of that $\texttt{mex}$ at a time.

Let $l$ and $r$ represent the highest left bound and the lowest right bound respectively of a subsegment that satisfies a given $\texttt{mex}$, and $\texttt{pos}$ represent  the index of $\texttt{mex}$. If we know $l$, $r$, and $\texttt{pos}$, then we can quickly count the subsegments for a given $\texttt{mex}$.

First, if $\texttt{pos}$ is between $l$ and $r$, the number of valid subsegments with this $\texttt{mex}$ is zero since the $\texttt{mex}$ of this subsegment is greater than the $\texttt{mex}$ we are looking for.

> We need to find all subsegments of length $\leq 2 \cdot \texttt{mex}$ that contain $l \ldots r$ that don't include $\texttt{pos}$. Say $\texttt{pos}>r$, since we only need to change our approach slightly if $\texttt{pos} < l$. We can increment $r$ from $r$ to $\texttt{pos}-1$ fast enough, since each time we increment we increase the size of our subsegment by $1$, for a maximum of $N$ times.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We need to find all subsegments of length $\leq 2 \cdot \texttt{mex}$ that contain $l \ldots r$ and don't include $\texttt{pos}$. Say $\texttt{pos}>r$, since we only need to change our approach slightly if $\texttt{pos} < l$. We can increment $r$ from $r$ to $\texttt{pos}-1$ fast enough, since each time we increment we increase the size of our subsegment by $1$, for a maximum of $N$ times.
```

---
id: cf-1744F
source: CF
title: MEX vs MED
author: Alex Du
---

## Explanation

> <Spoiler title="Hint 1 (read before solution)">

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<Spoiler title="Hint 1">
```
maybe split this hint up?

How do we know if a specific subsegment satisfies the constraints for a given

> $mex$?

Reviewer 2: \texttt{} variable names greater than 2 chars

we increment we increase the size of our subsegment by $1$, for a maximum of $N$
times.

Considering this new bound of $r$, we can find the number of possible values of
$l$ that form a valid subsegment. We know that the $mex$ is correct for this
right bound of $r$ and all left bounds $\leq l$, since the original $l \ldots r$
covered $0, 1, \ldots, mex - 1$, and $pos > r$. Therefore, we just need to find
the number of positions $\leq l$ such that $r-l+1 \leq mex \cdot 2$. The lower
bound of our smallest value of $l$ is $r-mex \cdot 2 + 1$, which can be found by
rearranging the previous inequality. Note that if this value is negative, it
must be set to $0$. After this, we know that all values between $l$ and this
smallest $l$ are valid left bounds for our given $r$, so we can add
$l-smallest\_l + 1$. Again, note that if $l < smallest\_l$, which will happen in
the case that our bounds $l$ and $r$ are too big, we should instead add $0$.

We can do the same if $pos < l$, by decrementing from $l$ to $pos+1$ with minimal
changes to the math.

To quickly find the next position of $mex$, we can store the position of each integer.

</Spoiler>

> ## Implementation

Reviewer 2: move this into spoiler

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;

using ll = long long;

void solve() {
	int n;
	cin >> n;

	// stores position of integer
	vector<int> pos(n);

	for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
		int x;
		cin >> x;
		pos[x] = i;
	}

	// initialize left and right bounds for mex
	int l = pos[0], r = pos[0];
	ll ans = 1;

	// mex represents the current mex l and r cover
	for (int mex = 1; mex < n; mex++) {
		int next_pos = pos[mex];

		// skip if next_pos is already between l and r
		if (l <= next_pos && next_pos <= r) { continue; }

		/*
		 * Since we can create a valid subsegment for a given mex up until
		 * size mex * 2, our max difference between l and r is mex * 2 - 1.
		 */
		int max_diff = mex * 2 - 1;

		if (next_pos < l) {
			for (; l > next_pos; l--) {
				int largest_r = min(l + max_diff, n - 1);
				// add all possible right bounds that don't change the current
				// mex
				ans += max(largest_r - r + 1, 0);
			}
		} else {
			for (; r < next_pos; r++) {
				int smallest_l = max(r - max_diff, 0);
				// add all possible left bounds that don't change the current
				// mex
				ans += max(l - smallest_l + 1, 0);
			}
		}
	}

	cout << ans << endl;
}

int main() {

> 	int t;
> 	cin >> t;
> 	while (t--) { solve(); }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	int test_num;
	cin >> test_num;
	for (int t = 0; t < test_num; t++) { solve(); }
```
also can you take the solve() and put it in the for loop directly

---
id: cf-1744F
source: CF
title: MEX vs MED
author: Alex Du
---

## Explanation

[Official Analysis (No Code)](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/108101)

<Spoiler title="Hint 1">

> How do we know if a specific subsegment satisfies the constraints for a given
> $\texttt{mex}$?
> 
> First, to reach that value of $\texttt{mex}$, we must find subsegments which contain all
> integers $0, 1, \ldots, \texttt{mex}-1$, while also not containing $\texttt{mex}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reach that value of $\texttt{mex}$, we must find subsegments which contain all
integers $0, 1, \ldots, \texttt{mex}-1$, while also not containing $\texttt{mex}$.
```

Then, given a subsegment, $\texttt{mex} > \texttt{med}$ will be satisfied if the length of the

> subsegment is $\leq 2 \cdot \texttt{mex}$, since the median will be at most $\texttt{mex}-1$.

Reviewer 3: put this in its own separate hint

Reviewer: yeah I agree

> Then, given a subsegment, $\texttt{mex} > \texttt{med}$ will be satisfied if the length of the
> subsegment is $\leq 2 \cdot \texttt{mex}$, since the median will be at most $\texttt{mex}-1$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a subsegment of length $\leq 2 \cdot \texttt{mex}$, the condition$\texttt{mex} > \texttt{med}$ will be satisfied, since the median can be at most $\texttt{mex}-1$.
```
Add this in the separate hint as @SansPapyrus683 mentioned

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Hint 2">

> Combining the two ideas in Hint 1, we can first find $l$ and $r$, which represent the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First find $l$ and $r$, which represent the
```

> indices of the left-most and right-most occurences of the numbers

Reviewer: what does this mean

$0, 1, \ldots \texttt{mex} - 1$ respectively. Then, find all subsegments that contain the
subsegment $l \ldots r$ within themselves, have length $\leq 2 \cdot \texttt{mex}$, and

> do not contain $\texttt{mex}$ itself. Now, we just need to count these

Reviewer: Yeah probably simplify this at a high level

> subsegments efficiently.

Reviewer 3: ngl i feel like this is too specific
@ryanchou-dev do you agree with me that hints should give a general idea and not go into specifics w/ variables n stuff?

Author: left it out and put in solution

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Solution">

> Let $\texttt{pos}$ be the index of $\texttt{mex}$. If we know $l$, $r$, and $\texttt{pos}$, then we can
> count the subsegments for this $\texttt{mex}$ quickly.
> 
> First, if $\texttt{pos}$ is between $l$ and $r$, the number of subsegments with this
> $\texttt{mex}$ is zero, since the $\texttt{mex}$ of this subsegment is greater than the $\texttt{mex}$ we
> are looking for.
> 
> We need to find all subsegments that contain $l \ldots r$, that don't contain
> $\texttt{pos}$. Say $\texttt{pos}>r$, since we only need to slightly change our approach for
> $\texttt{pos} < l$. We can increment $r$ from $r$ to $\texttt{pos}-1$ fast enough, since each time
> we increment we increase the size of our subsegment by $1$, for a maximum of $N$
> times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $\texttt{pos}$ be the index of $\texttt{mex}$. If we know $l$, $r$, and $\texttt{pos}$, then we can quickly count the subsegments for this $\texttt{mex}$.
		

First, if $\texttt{pos}$ is between $l$ and $r$, the number of subsegments with this $\texttt{mex}$ is zero since the $\texttt{mex}$ of this subsegment is greater than the $\texttt{mex}$ we are looking for.
		

We need to find all subsegments that contain $l \ldots r$ that don't include $\texttt{pos}$. Say $\texttt{pos}>r$, since we only need to change our approach slightly $\texttt{pos} < l$, we can increment $r$ from $r$ to $\texttt{pos}-1$ fast enough, since each time we increment we increase the size of our subsegment by $1$, for a maximum of $N$ times.
```

> Considering this new bound of $r$, we can find the number of possible values of
> $l$ that form a valid subsegment. We know that the $\texttt{mex}$ is correct for this
> right bound of $r$ and all left bounds $\leq l$, since the original $l \ldots r$
> covered $0, 1, \ldots, \texttt{mex} - 1$, and $\texttt{pos} > r$. Therefore, we just need to find
> the number of\ positions $\leq l$ such that $r-l+1 \leq \texttt{mex} \cdot 2$. The lower
> bound of our smallest value of $l$ is $r-\texttt{mex} \cdot 2 + 1$, which can be found by
> rearranging the previous inequality. Note that if this value is negative, it
> must be set to $0$. After this, we know that all values between $l$ and this
> smallest $l$ are valid left bounds for our given $r$, so we can add
> $l-\texttt{smallest\_l} + 1$. Again, note that if $l < \texttt{smallest\_l}$, which will happen in
> the case that our bounds $l$ and $r$ are too big for our current $\texttt{mex}$, we should instead add $0$.
> 
> We can do the same if $\texttt{pos} < l$, by decrementing from $l$ to $\texttt{pos}+1$ with minimal
> changes to the math.
> 
> To quickly find the next position of $\texttt{mex}$, we can store the position of each integer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Considering this new bound of $r$, we can find the number of possible values of $l$ that form a valid subsegment. We know that the $\texttt{mex}$ is correct for this right bound of $r$ and all left bounds $\leq l$, since the original $l \ldots r$ covered $0, 1, \ldots, \texttt{mex} - 1$, and $\texttt{pos} > r$. Therefore, we need to find the number of\ positions $\leq l$ such that $r-l+1 \leq \texttt{mex} \cdot 2$. The lower
bound of our smallest value of $l$ is $r-\texttt{mex} \cdot 2 + 1$, which we can find by rearranging the previous inequality. 

Note that if this value is negative, we should set it to $0$. After this, we know that all values between $l$ and this smallest $l$ are valid left bounds for our given $r$ so that we can add $l-\texttt{smallest\_l} + 1$. Again, note that if $l < \texttt{smallest\_l}$, which will happen in the case that our bounds $l$ and $r$ are too big for our current $\texttt{mex}$, we should instead add $0$. 

We can do the same if $\texttt{pos} < l$, by decrementing from $l$ to $\texttt{pos}+1$ with minimal changes to the math. To quickly find the next position of $\texttt{mex}$, we can store the position of each integer.
```

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N)$

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;

using ll = long long;

int main() {

> 	int t;
> 	cin >> t;
> 	while (t--) {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	int test_num;
	cin >> test_num;
	for (int t = 0; t < test_num; t++) {
```

		int n;
		cin >> n;

		// stores position of integer
		vector<int> pos(n);

		for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
			int x;
			cin >> x;
			pos[x] = i;
		}

		// initialize left and right bounds for mex
		int l = pos[0], r = pos[0];
		ll ans = 1;

		// mex represents the current mex l and r cover
		for (int mex = 1; mex < n; mex++) {
			int next_pos = pos[mex];

			// skip if next_pos is already between l and r
			if (l <= next_pos && next_pos <= r) { continue; }

			/*
			 * Since we can create a valid subsegment for a given mex up until
			 * size mex * 2, our max difference between l and r is mex * 2 - 1.
			 */
			int max_diff = mex * 2 - 1;

			if (next_pos < l) {
				for (; l > next_pos; l--) {
					int largest_r = min(l + max_diff, n - 1);
					// add all possible right bounds that don't change the
					// current mex
					ans += max(largest_r - r + 1, 0);
				}
			} else {
				for (; r < next_pos; r++) {
					int smallest_l = max(r - max_diff, 0);
					// add all possible left bounds that don't change the
					// current mex
					ans += max(l - smallest_l + 1, 0);
				}
			}
		}

> 		cout << ans << endl;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
		cout << ans << '\n';
```
endl's in a loop are kinda pointless ngl
(optional though, even i used to do this)

using ll = long long;

int main() {
    int t;
    cin >> t;
    while (t--) {
        int n;
        cin >> n;

        // stores\texttt{pos}ition of integer
        vector<int>\texttt{pos}(n);

        for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
            int x;
            cin >> x;
           \texttt{pos}[x] = i;
        }

        // initialize left and right bounds for mex

>         int l =\texttt{pos}[0], r =\texttt{pos}[0];

Reviewer 3: ayo

Author: 💀 ctrl + h
